hey guys and girls today i want to talk
to you
about one of my favorite squat
supplementary exercises
and that is a high bar one and a quarter
squat
now yesterday i had my squat session and
i worked up to
a heavy single it was 275 kilograms the
reason why i chose that number is
because
um that was a pb and i
felt at the time that i was strong
enough to do it and actually i was but
looking back it was probably a lot
heavier than i should have gone i don't
like to take myself
to the absolute limit and you know when
you watch this uh
275 that i did you'll see that it was
absolutely limited probably shouldn't
have gone as heavy
but moving forward now i know where i'm
at and i know
how to stay sub-maximal i just got to
keep it below 275
if ever i do go for a single you know
for the next for the next while
but anyway what i'm going to be doing is
going through
the highlight video of my session just
working up to the 275 kilograms
and i'm going to talk to you about
everything that i'm doing and i'm going
to explain the exercise i'm going to
explain
the footwear the warm-ups the belt
everything i'm doing my hand position my
foot position
so that hopefully you guys can learn a
little bit um and if you like it
you should try it um if you can achieve
the position that is which most of you
should
uh if you're able to perform a barbell
back squat
this is definitely one of my favorite
supplementary exercises for so many
reasons
that i'm going to be talking about now
so
let's get started so you know before i
even think about doing any of the squats
you know getting under a barbell i start
warming up and my warm-up procedure
as we've got here guru the squat set one
uh gorilla squats i didn't name it
gorilla squat actually i just used to
call them bend overs but i guess
uh someone's named them gorilla squats
so we'll go with that
i do sets of 20 there and then i
uh while i'm resting from the set of 20
uh i'll do some leg swings to mobilize
my hips now
the idea of the gorilla squat is a
couple of things so
i'm standing in a stance where i'm able
to reach down and touch the ground with
my arms so
having my arms on the inside of my knees
forces me to open my hips and push my
knees out which is a technique that i
like to
use and teach for a squat and i get a
lot of great success with that another
thing is
bending over to touch the ground i'm
also that bent over stance i'm putting
blood through my erector spinae that's
my back muscles
because i want to warm up my back as
well not just my legs
leg swings set too i'm mobilizing my
hips here i'm not stretching muscles
here
um i just like to loosen up the hip
joint it's a ball and socket joint and
it allows me to squat
to full depth and it just allows my hips
to feel nice it's something that i've
been using forever
and it's the way that i teach my squats
for my clients and athletes and they
seem to enjoy it
and so far we've got a good track record
of squat performance
upper body mobilizations for my shoulder
you'll probably see that my shoulder
mobility sucks before i even get under
the barbell
um you know just take the shoulder
through the range of motion that i'm
going to be needing when i grab that
barbell it seems a bit funny
and for some of you it would be a little
bit funny because most people actually
have a lot better shoulder mobility than
me
i'm going to pause it right there on
this shoulder mobility exercise
you know people ask me if i had better
mobility like shouldn't i be working a
little bit more on my mobility work so i
had better mobility
the answer is is kind of not really i'm
a power lifter
and i don't really need more mobility
than what i have
for my sport if i was to play another
sport i don't know like a team sport
like rugby or even martial arts i would
definitely need more mobility
and i would have worked on it over the
however many years i've been playing it
for but i've been powerlifting now for
10 years
and the reason i've been able to get to
the level that i'm at currently is
because
i've really been performing specificity
with powerlifting i haven't been playing
any other sports
i've just focused on those movements
which is a luxury that i have i've spent
a lot of time on the sport it's what i
do for a job like
i'm here in my gym and i've i invest a
lot of my time
to be able to an effort to be able to
perform this
pretty much as a full-time job so
therefore i'm as mobile as i need to be
for my sport
now why am i talking about this
i no question that a lot of people ask
me and you're probably going to think
the same thing when you see me do it
why do i hold the barbell so wide when i
perform any of my back squats
well here's the rule that i have is that
you need to grab the bar as close as
your shoulder mobility allows
so when i first started squatting i
wasn't
as muscular in my shoulders i wasn't
very strong and i was actually able to
hold the bar with my
my hands quite close now what happens is
one of the cues that i teach is to
hands as close shoulder mobility allows
elbows back and shoulder blades down
so bringing the hands in close what that
does is it allows me to
i'm sure that if you guys feel this at
home when you bring your hands in it
allows you to use
to bring your shoulder blades together
so that's retraction of the scapula
and then the next cue is shoulder blades
down so that's retraction and depression
of the scapula
retraction of the scapula pulling your
elbows back and hands in close
uses your traps trapezius and your
rhomboids
so when they're active that increases
the upper back
tension pulling the shoulder blades down
uh that's lats that's a cue that i use
to activate lats
uh lats attaches from the front of the
shoulder here
and comes around and attaches to the
lower back through
fascia and then it attaches to the top
of the pelvis so
it covers a very long distance of the
spine
so when we want to be loading our spine
and exercises
such as a squat or a dead lift or any
spine loading movements
so those variations of the spots in
their lips it makes sense to have the
lats on
so that's the pressure of the scapula so
that's all about upper back tension so
that we can load our spine safely
so people then say why are you holding
the bar so wide
well actually that's just as close as my
shoulder mobility allows
it is laughable i'll admit it but
it's what it is okay so uh let's press
play again
with me walking up to my first weight so
uh just rewind a little bit i've done
four sets of those gorilla squats
uh usually that's what i do so four sets
of twenty so i'm quite warm
and now i come to my first weight
grabbing the bar as close as my shoulder
mobility allows which is
hands flat on the plates look at the
movement it's a high bar squat it's a
one and a quarter so that quarter
movement
is at that bottom position uh pause
right there
as i'm coming up to the 100 kilograms
which is my next
set and let's talk about a few of the
things so this is a high bar squat
uh where does the bus sit on the high
bar uh upper trapezius my low bar
uh is probably about where the barbell
rests on my rear delts it's probably
about
two inches further down on my back and
it's a lot stronger
so the idea of this is actually
to build the muscles and and strengthen
the areas that i've neglected
with my main competition style so what
does that mean so my main competition
style squad is a low bar squat with
wraps
so having a low bar with wraps wraps
act as really strong quadriceps so i
don't really
need my quads to be as strong as my hips
in a low butt squat
it's a very hip dominant movement so
therefore i'm
somewhat neglecting my quadriceps now
just because i
need stronger hips doesn't mean quads
aren't handy
and if i continue to neglect my
quadriceps
i'm going to have a weak point and
therefore my squat's going to stuff up
so this is where i spend time correcting
those imbalances strengthening my weak
points so that when i come back to my
main style of squat
there's no weak points hopefully there's
always going to be something
but that's what we work on improving is
weak areas so quadriceps being a weak
area
i want to think of a squat variation
that's going to allow me to strengthen
my quadriceps
my favorite one for that is high bar
squat
so what you've got to think about is a
squat pattern that's going to allow
upright torso angle and more knee bend
so that's pretty much front squat any of
those high bar squat variations
but also have a look at the footwear the
elevated heels that's a weightlifting
shoe
that's going to allow me to achieve
greater depth and allow my pelvis to
stay neutral in that bottom position if
i wear flat soldier
some people have the mobility to wear a
flat-soled shoe and hit that ass to
grasp position
and maintain a neutral spine but for me
i don't and i always
recommend that when people want to
strengthen the quadriceps
and be more upright that the elevated
heel is a really great advantage
it's a great tool to be able to help you
strengthen your quadriceps so that's me
now
i've got 100 kilograms on the bra let's
press play again 100 kilograms on the
bar i'm holding the bars close to
shoulder mobility allows
which is end to end coming under the bar
placing the barbell on my
upper traps which is high bar squat
position
elbows back shoulder blades down
activating all the right muscles in my
upper back now i'm standing in my
comfortable stance
which is slightly outside of shoulder
width
let's pause it again that's slightly
outside of shoulder width
now here's the rules that i have with
stance the first rule is everyone's
different
so what's comfortable for me may not be
comfortable
for you uh how do we determine what that
comfortable stance is
trial and error um so don't do trial and
error as we're warming up
do the trial and error thing on an empty
bar feel where your appropriate stance
is going to be where your strong and
comfortable
stance it's a stance that's going to
allow you
to achieve the bottom position and
maintain a neutral spine
so i find when people stand too close or
too wide
what happens when they approach that
full depth of the squat is the tail
or the pelvis can tuck under that's
known as butt wink
another way of saying that is
posteriorly
rotating of that pelvis so the butt
tucks under
now when the pelvis is neutral the spine
could be neutral when the
tail tucks under or when you're your
butt winking that forces the lower back
the lumbar spine to go into flexion or
lower back rounding under load
so loads being the barbell on your back
can cause an increased risk of disc
injury so we want to avoid that
so appropriate stance is important for
that so there's
probably a range where you're going to
be able to achieve the bottom position
and remain neutral so it's like it's not
just one exact spot you can
probably fall you know an inch or so
inside or outside of that perfect stance
but then we've got strength as well so
whatever's nice and strong now here's
the next rule
uh whenever we're targeting quadriceps i
like to stand
slightly closer uh whenever we're
targeting hips we can stand slightly
wider that becomes more hip dominant so
this is
for me i'm targeting quadriceps now my
stance
is probably wider than other people's
close
stance but for me i'll stand my low bar
squat my hip dominant squat
even wider than that so for me this is
relatively close
now that quarter movement let's just
press play move on to the next weight
which is going to be 125 kilograms
so we've got the back view here um
yeah my hands are flat on the plates
what i will try and do is as i get
warmer i bring my hands in so i'm
grabbing the bar so that's not the
strongest grip
okay all the way down full depth
controlling that weight to full depth
bringing the weight back up just above
parallel back down again
and drive it up fast so it's a one and a
quarter an area that i see people make
is kind of
bounce that quarter and then bounce back
up again
don't do that we're trying to use our
muscles so we're strengthening muscles
we're trying to control that weight this
is 150 kilograms same thing hands out
wide but i'm trying to bring it in close
full depth nice and controlled all the
way down maintaining neutral spine
for all my squat variations i look
straight ahead that's a rule that i have
some people have different rules for me
it works
very well i learned it from who someone
who in my opinion is the best quarters
in the world that's the lilly bridge
family
look straight ahead the body follows the
eyes you look down you can that's where
you're gonna fail
175 kilograms full depth controlling it
that quarter movement uh let's pause it
here as i'm racking that 175. why do i
do that quarter rep
at the bottom well the bottom range
that's the
weakest part uh you know when people are
cheating their squads they want to do
you know the quarter rep gang they want
to
you know they shallow squat is because
that's the easiest part that's the
strongest part as we get lower and lower
and deeper and deeper
it becomes a little bit harder we are in
a less mechanically
advantageous position so that full
depth i don't want a weak point so
that's something that i say you can't be
too strong in that bottom of that squat
so if in doubt strengthen that bottom
range
um so that's what the one that that
extra quarter rep is doing
it's giving me more time under tension
just right at the bottom right in the
hole so now hopefully when i come into
competition
i've developed strength in the weakest
point
so hopefully like i said there's no weak
point so that's going to mean that when
i get to my
competition weight i'm not scared to to
hit the
depth required at the competition which
is is technically the rule is to get the
the crease of the hip below the top of
the knee
if it's above that um it's shallow
so parallel a lot of people think it's
got to be parallel no
it can't be parallel that's shallow it's
going to be below parallel or the crease
of the hip got to be below the top of
the knee
so that's the range that i'm taking my
body through with this quarter rep
okay 200 kilograms
up next same thing i haven't brought my
hands in yet i am getting warm and my
shoulders are feeling more uncomfortable
to place that bar
uh in position elbows back shoulder
blades down
walk out to my comfortable stance um
let's have a look at the feet pausing in
that bottom position now let's have a
look at my stance my toes are pointed
slightly outwards
now if it was up to comfort my toes
would be pointed a little bit further
outwards than this
here's a little trick that i like i like
to teach
um to not point the toes out so much so
wherever you feel is comfortable
from this position it's quite easy to
achieve that bottom position
of the squat and remain neutral but easy
isn't necessarily better that's called
the path
of least resistance okay so that's that
is comfortable but it's not necessarily
strong something that i find very strong
not only for myself but
a lot of my athletes is to bring the
heels out a little bit so the feet are a
little bit straighter
i'm not talking that i want your feet to
be parallel but just not splayed out uh
to the most comfortable point
bring the heels out a little bit so the
toes are only pointed out
slightly um try that you're gonna feel
an
increase of tension in a good way at the
hips
and that increased tension is also
increase
of strength okay so it's a slightly
stronger position
for some of you you might feel that it
makes it a little bit more challenging
to achieve that bottom position
yeah it does because we've increased
tension but it is still
a proper technique and it is still a
safe technique
not too much that it's uncomfortable or
if it creates any pain just don't do it
so this isn't a painful technique for me
it's just a little bit
tighter in a good way tight equals
strong
loose equals weak remember that okay so
press play again so
that quarter rep with 200
looking good i'm still able to control
that weight
mutual spine uh no breakdown of
technique and i'm shooting that weight
up
um pretty good speed
i don't want to say fast you know it's
it's controlled really nicely
next way we got 225 kilograms
now look at my hands i've brought them
onto the bar so it's not hands on the
plates anymore
i brought the hands onto the bar and i'm
holding it with three fingers
okay so that's inc my shoulders are
warming up i'm increasing the tension
here
okay nice and controlled i'm not just
dropping it
controlling up don't just bounce up um
and then back up to the step start again
now
225 kilograms uh that's the weight when
i start
feeling like um this is going to
determine if it's a strong day or not
you know when i've got 100 kilos on the
barn someone says how does it feel
it's hard for me to answer that because
it's it's really lightweight and it
feels easy and it should feel easy
that weight doesn't ever feel hard but
now we're at a weight so about 225
kilograms i'm starting to really feel
the weight
um and feel whether or not it's feasible
to hit those numbers that i've
planned for in the session okay press
play
walking up to 250 kilograms this is my
last warm-up
i've got it on mute at the moment but my
music starts to go a little bit louder i
start to get
a little bit more psyched up i don't
like to psych up during my session
because it's quite exhausting but now as
i'm
getting heavier this is nice to control
250 full depth controlling
up that quarter rep knees are pointing
outwards in the same direction as my
toes the goal is to open the hips
spread the foot let's pause it before i
come in for that 275
kilogram top set so what i'm doing with
my feet is
uh the cues that i use is initiate the
movement that initiate the down phase by
imagining
you're spreading the floor so imagine
there's a piece of paper on the ground
you're standing on and you want to rip
that paper in half
so they should be slightly your feet
should be flat definitely but there's
slightly
outwards pressure on the feet that's how
i like to teach it
what that does is having outwards
pressure it's not just a two-dimensional
movement you're not just going to bump
back and and knees forward
we're opening the hips the knees are
coming out um we're we're creating force
this way
so that's called so when we we bring our
legs outwards that's called
abduction of the hip joint glutes are
responsible for that
and it's kind of like imagine windscreen
wipers that's kind of what we're doing
with our feet so this is called
abduction of the hip joint as well as
external rotation
there are two main functions of the
glutes the third being extension which
is what we're doing we have no choice
but to extend the hip joint
so that's getting the most out of our
really strong
glutes okay so spreading the floor
knees out in the same direction as the
toes opening the hips
ed cohen the greatest power lifter of
all time would say open your taint you
may have heard him say that
that's what he's referring to so one one
great reason why we're doing that is to
really utilize our
strong glutes and hip muscles another
nice reason
for doing this is opening the hips
creates room for the pelvis to achieve
that bottom position
it's not just a two-dimensional movement
a lot of people
assess the squat from the side and they
look at you know the back angle
and the hip angle but i assess the squat
from every from the front on from
45 degrees from side on from the back
it's a three-dimensional movement we're
opening our hips
okay uh 275 once again
it's muted so you don't hear it but i've
got i think it's eminem
he's my favorite he's nice and
aggressive and gets me in the right mood
for my top sets the music is really loud
at this point
so i'll touch on that again having loud
music and
you know being psyched out for the
entire session is really exhausting
so so actually on my warm-ups i'm very
calm very focused and i try and keep my
heart rate
down because that's energy consuming i'm
taking about
six minutes five to six minutes of rest
between these top sets
so you can imagine this is probably an
hour and a half into my session after
the warm-ups
if you're sitting there with music
blasting for that whole time you're
going to come up to the top set and
you're going to be exhausted
so you know this is the loudest music
this is when i'm really switched on i've
got
my training partners there in the
background we've got godly strong
that's alex simon give him a follow
we've got dinny j
my wife is in the corner she doesn't
want to she gets a little bit shy
when uh when i train she doesn't ever
want to put me off not that she does but
she just doesn't want her just in case
but i've got dinny j that's um really
strong chick
and and godly strong uh on his second
ever power lifting competition he was
top 10 in the world uh number one in
australia he retired
um give him a follow they're really cool
guys to follow they're my training
partners for this day
and and that's when they start screaming
you know come on bass let's do it or
whatever they say
um but that's you know that's a
completely different topic altogether
that i could go on and on about but
that's my aroused state
that's when i'm fully psyched up and
that's what i need
when i'm hitting these top weights i
don't need that on my warm up weight so
those of you doing the back slap thing
on the warm-up weights
maybe reconsider okay here we go
okay coming under the bar look at my
hand i've got a full grip on the bar now
okay so this is increased tension in my
upper back again
so it's really tight on my shoulders and
it's really strong
position okay small technical
breakdowns here i get the death wobbles
i'm shaking as i'm coming up
because that is what i call an rpe 10
like i've pushed as hard as i can
you even see alex that's godly strong
look at the size of that human being
he comes running in behind um to help me
re-rack it because he saw that was a max
effort push
and you know sometimes when you give
everything on the push you're
unable to re-rack the weight so he came
in to help me because of that because it
was max effort once again
i didn't mean for it to be max effort i
like to
um even for my uh pbs or pr
however you want to say it those
attempts i like to say
i could have done more i like to say
that was you know
high 90 but not quite 100 i can't say
that about this way that was absolutely
uh you could see by the breakdown in
technique
every now and then that happens i teach
people don't let that happen in training
save those things for competition but
sometimes
[Music]
it just happens uh yeah i'm definitely
guilty of that i'll teach you you know
do as i say not as i do i'll teach
people don't let it
you know don't max out in the gym um you
know and i didn't follow that rule
myself so
um shame on me but anyway it was a great
day it was a pb so i was happy with that
and that's a one and a quarter squat
it's one of my favorite supplementary
exercises
high bars you know slow tempo control
movements
it teaches it strengthens quadriceps
really nicely but it also
teaches you to maintain a really nice
upright
torso angle in a low bar squat in a
competition
there is more forward torso lane but a
lot of people look at it and they say
a low bar is more forward torso length
so you've got to lean forward well
if you intentionally lean forward with
your maximum weight like
uh to put it into perspective i've
recently squatted 400 kilograms like if
i intentionally lean forward with 400
kilograms
i'm just going to tip forward and stay
down so
so even though there is slight forward
torso lean you want to be
staying as upright as possible if
anyone's ever heard me coaching my
competitive athletes in a squat you'll
hear me scream out that cue
upright upright upright and the high bar
squat definitely complements that
position so
uh that's it for that i don't want to
keep rambling on i do
tend to do that but i hope you enjoyed
this information that i've given you on
a one and a quarter
high bar squat with elevated heels one
of my favorite supplementary movements
give it a try uh leave a comment down
below tell me
um if you enjoyed this as well as what
you'd like me to talk about next time
hope you enjoyed see you guys